When there is a health crisis, misinformation can also spread quickly.  STOCK IMAGE. As the world battles to bring novel coronavirus infections under control, more and more people are seeking information around the virus. The World Health Organization says that the outbreak has been accompanied by an “infodemic“: “an over-abundance of information – some accurate and some not – that makes it hard for people to find trustworthy sources and reliable guidance when they need it”. Africa Check has been busy fact-checking viral WhatsApp messages, Facebook posts, tweets and news articles in recent weeks. We will continue to do so as long as there is a need for accurate information during this difficult time. We have grouped our fact-checks into six broad categories, which are alphabetically sorted. We will be adding more categories – and checks – as we encounter them.   Bonus Read Not sure whether to join the global scramble for a facemask? Read our analysis of the topic: Coronavirus in Africa – to mask or not to mask, that is the question More Resources Are you a reporter battling against the tide of misinformation? First Draft has come up with a handy toolbox of resources. Five Steps to Fight Fake News and False Information Ask yourself these five questions before sharing a message online. How to Contact Us Seen something around Covid-19 that you would like checked? Send it to us:
Email: info@africacheck.org | Twitter: @Africa Check | Facebook: @AfricaCheck | Or Whatsapp us on + 27 73 749 7875 in South Africa, +254 729 305650 in Kenya and +234 908 377 7789 in Nigeria. You can also subscribe to our popular What’s Crap on WhatsApp voice note show by adding +27 82 709 3527 as a contact into your phone and sending us a message to confirm, or by clicking here. Share this #LiveGuide Many people may feel helpless during this time, especially if they are working from home or self-isolating. But we can all help combat false and misleading information about the novel coronavirus. Please share this #LiveGuide and encourage your friends and family to share accurate information. Tag @AfricaCheck and use #CoronaVirusFacts. Previous report No, spekboom isn’t more effective than the Amazon rainforest at ‘sucking carbon’ out of the atmosphere   © Copyright Africa Check 2020. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page. 