The electromagnetic spectrum is like a map of the various frequencies at which energy is transmitted through space in the form of waves known as “electromagnetic radiation”.“Electromagnetic radiation is a form of energy transfer,” Dr Eric van Rongen, the chair of the Germany-based commission on non-ionizing radiation protection told Africa Check. It is most familiar to us as visible light, but there are other frequencies that are invisible to humans.This spectrum is ordered by frequency, measured in hertz. Radio waves, which have the longest wavelengths of the known waves in the electromagnetic spectrum sit on the lower frequency end, as do microwaves.On the highest frequency end are x-rays and gamma rays.  5G technology will make use of three radiofrequency bands, according to the US Federal Communications Commission. These are: Many conspiracy theories suggest that 5G’s use of electromagnetic radiation is to blame for cancers. As well as the false claims that 5G causes Covid-19, other concerns have stemmed from the World Health Organization classifying all radiofrequency radiation as “possibly carcinogenic to humans”. But the WHO states that  this is not a measure of the risk, and that the evidence for this link “falls short of being conclusive”. Leaf extracts from aloe vera are also placed in this group.The commission on non-ionizing radiation protection has acknowledged that research into whether this type of radiation is a possible cancer risk is ongoing, but has said (see page 42) that “no effects of radiofrequency [electromagnetic fields] on the induction or development of cancer have been substantiated”.But what impact does electromagnetic radiation have on the human body?We asked Van Rongen, chair of the radiation protection commission about this. Whether electromagnetic radiation is dangerous “depends on the conditions of exposure”, he said. He broke these risks down, starting with the highest frequencies to the lowest. Please complete this form to receive the HTML sharing code.  A former presidential candidate took to national TV, where he among other claims said 5G radiation levels could ‘cremate’ people. Was Martin... What are the symptoms of Covid-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus? How can I protect myself and others? Why is social distancing ...