The Covid-19 pandemic has brought many countries, and the movement of people, to a near standstill. As the world looks to restart, migration will again be at the fore, with South Africa likely to be a key part of this. Immigrants and refugees have often sought better opportunities in the country. Similarly, many South Africans have emigrated to other parts of the world, in search of greener pastures.  The terms used to describe this migration overlap but are not entirely synonymous. International migration law has given us some common denominators, but how these terms are defined and used in practice differs from country to country. In order to accurately report on the causes and patterns of migration to and from South Africa, it’s important to understand migration terms and when to use them.  There is no universally accepted definition of a migrant. According to the International Organization for Migration, a migrant can be defined as “a person who moves away from his or her place of usual residence, whether within a country or across an international border, temporarily or permanently, and for a variety of reasons”. So “migrant” is an umbrella term, encompassing a number of groups of persons who may have different legal statuses.  When we talk about migration, we tend to focus on international migration. But the vast majority of migration in South Africa happens within its borders. Domestic migration, also known as internal migration, is the result of South Africans moving from one province or municipality to another. Domestic migration also includes the circular migration of South Africans who work in one part of the country and maintain a residence in another. Statistics South Africa (Stats SA), the country’s national data agency, measures domestic migration by asking survey respondents which province they were born in. This provides domestic migration data at a provincial level but does not tell us much about migration between cities. South Africa’s Gauteng province receives the largest number and proportion of domestic migrants. Stats SA’s 2016 community survey shows that there were 13,381,004 people living in Gauteng, while only 8,648,974 (65%) were born in the province.   A temporary resident is allowed to legally stay in South Africa for  longer than 90 days. Visas are issued to foreigners who would like to invest in South Africa, who have skills that are seen as critical, and who would like to study at a South African learning institution, among other reasons.   South Africa’s  home affairs department provides different types of temporary residence visas. These include business, study and medical treatment visas. The most recent Stats SA publication on documented immigrants is from 2015. It shows that 67% of the 75,076 temporary residence permits issued that year were to citizens from the following 10 countries: Source: Statistics South Africa 2015  Migrants can apply for permanent residence if they have been living in South Africa with a work permit for five years, if they intend to establish a business in the country, or if they are financially independent, among other qualifiers.  According to section 25 of the Immigration Act of 2002, permanent residents enjoy the same rights as South Africans, except rights restricted to citizens by the constitution. For example, a permanent resident cannot vote and can be deported if they commit a crime. In 2015, 6,397 permanent residence permits were issued. The majority were issued to citizens from Zimbabwe (33.6%), India (9.7%), China (9.2%), Nigeria (5.5%), Democratic Republic of the Congo (5.1%), the United Kingdom (4%), Pakistan (3.5%), Ghana (2%), Germany (1.8%) and Lesotho (1.7%).Permanent residents can also become citizens if they meet the criteria in the Citizenship Act of 1995.  Challenges faced by refugees and asylum seekers in South Africa often make headlines. But what do these terms mean and what is the difference between the two?  South Africa defines an asylum seeker as a person who has fled their country of origin, is seeking recognition and protection as a refugee in South Africa, and whose application is still under consideration. Not every asylum seeker will be recognised as a refugee but every recognised refugee was initially an asylum seeker. If an application is unsuccessful, the asylum seeker must leave the country voluntarily or face deportation. In response to a parliamentary question in 2019, home affairs minister Aaron Motsoaledi said that 18,104 requests for asylum were processed by his department in 2018. As of 31 December 2018, there were 3,534 cases still to be processed. An eligible asylum seeker receives a permit which legalises their stay in South Africa. The permit is valid for six months but can be extended by a further six months if their application is still being considered. This permit allows the asylum seeker to work and study in South Africa, and protects them from deportation. Asylum seekers must remain in the country until their adjudication process is completed.  Please complete this form to receive the HTML sharing code.